Israel is responding to Hamas' surprise attacks at the weekend with a series of airstrikes
in Gaza.
Palestinian health officials say more than 400 people have been killed.
Israel says that more than 700 of its citizens have died in the attacks so far, we get the
latest from both sides.
BBC News with Emily Thomas
The Israeli military has said its fighter jets, helicopters and artillery have struck over
500 targets overnight in the Gaza Strip.
Operations are continuing against Palestinian Hamas militants in several locations inside
Israel two days after they carried out a devastating mass assault.
More than 700 Israelis have been killed.
Health officials in Gaza say more than 400 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli airstrikes before
the latest barrage.
Hamas said it had fired missiles targeting Ben-Gurion Airport near Tel Aviv.
Three U.S. air carriers as well as Air France, Lufthansa and Emirates have suspended services
to Tel Aviv, but some evacuation flights have taken place from the airport.
The UN Security Council has held an emergency meeting in New York to discuss the crisis behind
closed doors.
The UN Middle East envoy called on all countries to exert diplomatic efforts to restore calm.
In other news, an independent inquiry in the UK will begin hearings today into allegations
that British special forces killed dozens of unarmed civilians in Afghanistan between
2010 and 2013.
The inquiry was set up after legal action was brought by two Afghan families.
The U.S. Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, who is leading a bipartisan delegation to China,
has met the foreign minister Wang Yi.
Mr Schumer is the latest high-level American official to visit as Washington seeks to
ease tensions with Beijing.
Mr Wang said he hoped the visit would help the U.S. to view its relationship with
China in a more objective way.
In Ecuador, the state of emergency has been extended by 30 days.
It's been in place since the assassination in August of the anti-corruption presidential
candidate Fernando Villavicencio.
The extension comes just days after seven Colombians arrested over the killing were
found dead in prison.
BBC News.
We start this half hour of the programme with the latest developments in Gaza and Israel.
It is now two days since Hamas militants launched a wave of attacks against Israel.
Hamas runs Gaza, where more than two million Palestinians live, and Hamas is also designated
as a terror group by much of the Western world.
The death toll continues to rise.
700 Israelis have been killed and over 2,000 injured.
In retaliation, Israel has launched air strikes on the Gaza Strip, which have killed at least
413 people, and battles are continuing inside Israel between the Israeli Defence
Forces and Hamas fighters.
For the latest, I've been talking to a spokesperson for the Israeli Defence Forces,
Masha Mickelson.
And I asked if there are still fighters in Israel at the moment.
Yes, there are.
There's fighting still going on in several points in the community surrounding the Gaza
Strip. We're talking about Bari, Raim, Kfar Azad, the Zikim military base.
There's ongoing combat, and it's something that takes hours, multiple hours, to clear
those terrorists out.
And the idea is focusing right now on getting the southern part of Israel back to normal
without terrorists on Israeli soil.
How long do you think it will take to get it back to normal?
It's hard to say.
We hoped we would be in a better situation by the end of yesterday,
but there's still fighting going on.
This is our main objective throughout the day, to save as many lives as possible,
and get the terrorists out of Israel, whatever it takes.
While we're doing that, IDF aircraft are striking in Gaza hundreds of military
Hamas terrorist targets.
We have seen around 880 targets that have been struck, including terror tunnels.
That's, of course, in response to over 3,300 rockets that were fired from the Gaza Strip
in addition to the invasion.
I'm going to come back to the airstrikes in just a moment.
Do you know whether there are still Hamas fighters entering Israel,
or is that boundary between Israel and the Gaza Strip secure?
There are Hamas people trying to infiltrate Israel.
Yes, still as we speak, they're being met with fire from IDF UAVs that are
surveilling the area of the border.
When they entered two days ago in the morning,
they blew up significant parts of the fence.
So there are still breached points of the fence that we are securing through the year.
Do you know how many people have been abducted and taken from Israel to Gaza?
We don't have the exact numbers, but it's in the dozens.
Right. We spoke to one family an hour ago on this program.
They think that five members of their family, including an eight-year-old girl, have been taken.
And they contacted us because they were worried that the authorities were not doing
all they could to try to secure their return.
If you don't know exactly how many people have been taken,
do you have any idea where these people are and what are you intending to do
to try to secure their release?
We've seen documentation of hostages being held in Gaza in apartments and basements.
They're spread through multiple locations as far as we know.
The top officers in the military are currently presenting the political echelon
in the security cabinet for the past two days with plausible military options to go forward.
And of course, the hostages and their possible locations are being taken into account
as we decide what our next step is.
Israel is a state that holds human life sacred and we will do everything in our power
to ensure that they're coming back home safe.
But this is who Hamas is.
For years, they have been saying that this is their goal to eliminate the Jewish state,
to kill as many Jewish people as possible, to kidnap Jewish people.
And 48 hours ago, they showed their true face to the world.
Let's talk about the airstrikes.
You said that Hamas targets and tunnels that allow Hamas fighters to get from Gaza into Israel
have been hit by airstrikes, but also residential tower blocks have and mosques as well.
And we hear that more than 400 people have been killed, including children.
So Palestinian civilians are being killed and injured in these airstrikes, aren't they?
We're at war. The IDF targets, military targets that are used by Hamas.
Now, if Hamas treats their civilians for years as human shields, hiding ammunition
storages, hiding rocket launchers beneath schools, beneath mosques,
beneath UN facilities and kindergartens, we've seen how they treat Israeli citizens that they have
kidnapped. The IDF strikes targets that we have intelligence on that are being used by
Hamas for terrorism. And the way that Hamas acts is entrenching themselves cynically
within civilian population to make these actions more complicated for the IDF.
Of course, we are aware of that, but we are at war.
Masha Mickelson, the spokesperson for the Israeli Defense Forces, and I mentioned a family
in that interview, too, that IDF spokesperson who are waiting for news on five relatives who
have been abducted by Hamas fighters. We're going to play the interview with one of
those family members later on in the program.
Well, the number of Palestinians killed in the violence has also continued to rise.
Health officials in Gaza said there is more than 400 deaths so far, and over 2,000 people
have been injured, as Israel launches more air strikes on the territory. The Israeli air force
says that it struck over 500 terrorist targets in Gaza overnight.
Well, for more, we are now joined by Professor Lina Katibi, who is the director
of the Middle East Institute at the School of Oriental and African Studies University here
in London. Good morning to you and welcome to Newsday.
In your opinion, why do you think Hamas militants launched the operation in the first place?
The main reason is, of course, to try to put an end to the Israeli occupation that has been
going on for many, many, many years. The situation in Gaza in particular is really
very tough. It's been under siege for almost two decades, and Hamas wants to present itself
to the Palestinians as the entity that can make a difference in that regard.
So we have to remember here that the main goal for Hamas is political behind this military
operation. It's not to just call short-term destabilization. It's actually to say this is
a game-changing attack that puts Hamas as the central Palestinian entity for the world to kind of
engage with. But then one would wonder with this attack and seeing so many Palestinians dead and
obviously the ongoing fighting is still on. How much support does that leave Hamas
where we're in Gaza and among Palestinians?
Actually Hamas now enjoys wide support for this attack. People are very aware of the high price
that will be paid because of course Israel's retaliation is not going to be mild. And yet
they are so desperate that they feel they have nothing to lose. So that's why you're seeing
not just in Gaza but even wider in the Arab world a lot of support expressed for Hamas.
I think the Israel-Palestine conflict had been ignored for so long internationally that people
feel desperate measures are needed. And you said that there's even more wide
support for Hamas in the region as such. But looking at all that, we're not only
talking about infrastructures. There are lives and people who are being killed and injured and some
will be probably hostages. I wonder then in your opinion where does this go? How does this get
solved if anyone at all? The only way to resolve the situation is to resolve the Israel-Palestine
conflict. I mean without the conflict having been protracted for many many years,
Hamas would not have existed in the first place. I mean we have to remember in the 70s and 80s,
early 80s there was no Hamas. It was Fatah, the PLO and some other groups. But Hamas is a
relative newcomer in the history of the conflict and a product of the kind of stagnation
of this conflict politically. So the only way to resolve this is to go back to politics
and find a solution that is acceptable to Palestinians. I think you know these kinds of
groups like Hamas basically find an opening in protracted conflict and try to assert themselves
as a result. So we need the US back on track, we need the UK, we need the international community
at large to take this conflict seriously. We've already seen regional actors like Saudi Arabia
saying they are serious about wanting to find a solution to this conflict as well. So I think
this is the only way out. It's not about a military victory for anybody. It has to be
a political solution that restores peace. And briefly if you may, where does this leave
then the Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas in those conversations about a solution?
One of the things that is being achieved also by Hamas in this attack is to show
the weakness of the Palestinian Authority under Mahmoud Abbas. I think he's going to face
increasing criticism from Palestinians about the failures of his leadership. And it is likely that
in the aftermath of this attack, the Palestinian Authority will seek to find another leader
to replace Abbas, although it's not clear who that leader could be because there has not been a clear
succession plan. But definitely something needs to change in that regard as well.
Professor Lina Khatib, thank you for coming on to the program. She is the director of the
Middle East Institute at the School of Oriental and African Studies University here in London.
Well, aid and refugee groups are already warning that civilians on both sides have paid and will
continue to pay the heaviest price. More than 123,000 Palestinians have been displaced in Gaza so far,
with close to 74,000 seeking shelter in schools, according to the United Nations.
Well, on the line now from Jerusalem is Shayna Lowe of the Norwegian Refugee Council.
Welcome to Newsday, Shayna. What are your teams on the ground telling you?
Good morning. Yes, I just spoke to my colleague in Gaza about an hour ago. Last night was a
terrifying night full of bombardments. My colleague Yusef has two young children,
and they are doing all that they can to protect their children, distract them from what's going
on outside their windows. The night for them is, of course, the scariest time of day because
they just do not know what will happen, and it's when Israeli airstrikes really ramp up.
In terms of our ability to operate on the ground in Gaza, we can't right now. Our staff has been
told to shelter in place and take care of themselves and their families. And so we're
desperately waiting for a cessation of the hostilities in order for our staff to be
able to go out and assess the damage and provide needs and provide assistance
to those who are in need. So even as the UN says more than 120,000 Palestinians currently don't
have a home, you're unable to help them? Exactly. I mean, so long as there's
ongoing hostilities, we cannot, in good conscience, we have a duty of care to our staff,
and we cannot send them out to go and provide assistance until we know that they can reach
communities safely. Right. I see. What are you hearing from your team in Israel?
Well, we actually don't operate in Israel. We operate only in occupied Palestinian territory,
so that includes the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and then also in the Gaza Strip.
Right. Now, we know that the food situation was already stretched in Gaza before
Saturday's events. What is your message to the international community about the kinds of help
that is needed, and what is the likelihood that that help will be able to get through?
Yeah. I mean, we need to have demands from the international community to call for,
if not a cessation of the hostilities, at least a pause in which humanitarian actors
can access Gaza and provide assistance. I understand that yesterday the crossing with
Egypt was open and that some truckloads of food came in, but the reality in Gaza is that food
supplies are always very short. There's not a lot of extra food that is stockpiled there,
and so we, of course, are calling for a cessation of the hostilities so that
the international community, humanitarian organizations can bring in additional supplies
for Palestinians in need. We heard from a spokesperson for the Israeli Defense Forces
earlier on the program who was clear that if there is a location where they believe there is a
Hamas fighter or leader, they will target that location. So what is your message to civilians
in Gaza about whether they're at home or if they're displaced, but what they should do,
where they should go? I mean, the reality is that there is no safe place in Gaza.
For 16 years, Gaza has been besieged. Palestinians living there have very little ability to get
out or move. It's one of the most densely populated places on earth. 2.2 million people
are living there. And so when we hear remarks from Benjamin Netanyahu calling for Palestinians
in Gaza to leave, our question is, where should they go? Because Israel controls
people's exit from the Gaza Strip into Israel. Yes, exactly. And the Egyptian border,
my understanding is that it was open yesterday. For people to leave or not, do you know?
Well, people can leave, but it's cost prohibitive. So the Egyptian authorities
control the cost of exiting into Egypt. And my understanding is that they have increased that
cost considerably. And there are limitations in terms of the capacity that they have at this time
to be letting people flee for safety. All right. Thanks very much. That's
Shayna Lowe there from the Norwegian Refugee Council, who was on the line from Jerusalem.
And joining us back in the studio is Isaac Fennin with All This Fool.
Arsenal got a massive 1-0 win over Manchester City in the Premier League. Gabriela Martinelli
scoring the win. It was Ghana's first win in City in the League since 2015. Here's their manager,
Miquel Arteta. It's been a long time since the club hasn't beat Man City. And we discussed
that a lot. And we felt like today could be the day, but we needed a big performance,
huge individual performances. And we had that. And with a bit of luck, we managed to win the game.
For City, it's two defeats in the row in the Premier League for the first time in five years.
But manager Pep Guardiola says it's not the time to panic.
We're in October. People say, OK, this year is not going to happen. We're not going to
win the Premier League four times in a row. Listen, no team in all history have won
four times in a row. But we are in October. And from experience as a manager, this is a long,
long road. European football's governing body UEFA has postponed. All matches scheduled
in Israel during the next fortnight amid increased tension in the region.
Israel were due to play Switzerland in a Euro 2024 qualifier in Tel Aviv. But that game has
been rescheduled. And UEFA said it will assess the situation over the coming days to see
whether Israel's European championship qualifier in Kosovo can take place in October.
Simone Biles secured another two gold medals at the World Gymnastics Championships. Her 22nd
and 23rd, she won the beam and four titles to add to the team. And all around success
earlier on in the competition, she's got four gold medals on her return to the sport. She
is the most decorated gymnast in the sports history. And she's done all this,
having taken some time off after the Tokyo Olympics to focus on her mental health.
It hasn't been easy. I've been focusing a lot on my gymnastics and my mental,
going to therapy, making sure that's in my regular scheduled routine as of anything else.
But I'm really proud of the work that I put in because at the beginning of the year, I
wasn't sure I was going to be competing. And I actually wasn't supposed to be competing.
So to end up here now at Worlds at the end of the year, it's just like,
I just keep amazing myself.
There was a huge result in the Rugby World Cup as Portugal beat Fiji 24-23
to claim their first ever win at their first ever World Cup. Here's their player, Nicholas Martin.
Something incredible. I work a lot for that. I have nowhere to say that it's historic.
I'm so happy. I think it's the best moment of my life.
We are a team of friends from France, from Portugal, but we live together. It's something incredible.
Now despite their second loss of the group phase, Fiji are still
through to the quarter-finals. They will play England next weekend in Marseille.
And finally, Kenyon, Kelvin, Kiptum shattered the men's marathon world record
in Chicago as he beat Kampatria-Ellid, Kipchoge's previous mark
by more than 30 seconds. The 23-year-old finished in a time of two hours and 35 seconds.
Isaac Fennin, thank you so much for that news about the sporting world. Now this is news there
with Vic and Rob in other news this morning. An independent inquiry in the UK will begin
hearings today into allegations that British special forces killed dozens of unarmed civilians
in Afghanistan between 2010 and 2013. The inquiry was set up after legal action was brought by two
Afghan families. The US state majority leader, Chuck Schumer, who is leading a bipartisan
delegation to China, has met with the foreign minister Wang Yi. Mr. Schumer is the latest high
level American official to visit as Washington seeks to ease tensions with Beijing. Mr. Wang said
he hoped that the visit would help the US to view its relationship with China in a more objective
way. And in Ecuador, the state of emergency has been extended by 30 days. It's been in place
since the assassination in August of anti-corruption presidential candidate Fernando Vila Citencio.
The extension comes just days after seven Colombians arrested over the killing who are found dead in
prison. Now we're going to return to our main story now. It is more than 48 hours after Saturday's
unprecedented assault by fighters belonging to Hamas, which is designated as a terror organization by
Wani Western nations on Israel. And Hamas claims to have abducted more than 100 Israelis
with many taken over the boundary from Israel into Gaza. Some of them are believed to be Israeli
soldiers and many are civilians. Well, we've been contacted by a family anxious to know about the
fate of their five relatives who've been taken away from the Kibbutz of Nahos, which is a few
kilometers from Gaza. And I spoke on Sunday night to Yadin, who told me more about her missing
relatives. And she says she watched a Facebook live video in which she could see them being
taken, she thought, across the boundary into Gaza by these abductors.
If people didn't open the door and listen to them, they just shut the door and shut the people
whichever they want and took the rest in captivity. We don't know if they took them
across the border or just leave them there. We have no idea. And you could see all of this on
the video on Facebook. Yeah, it's 30 minutes live. Other than that, we just lost contact. So
there is no service or anything you can reach them. They are two little kids, two little daughters
of the partner who we don't know where they are. If they are together, if somebody is taking care
of them, there is another child who is 17 years old. It's a frightening situation. You said that
your aunt's partner appeared to have been shot in the leg. Was it clear from the video
whether he'd been given any medical care and how did the others in the video look?
One of the many videos that we saw is we saw Noam, the aunt's partner taking people of the
Hamas, is helping him walk through the border. Like for a two second shot, you could see it.
Other than that, we don't know anything. We just saw him walking very poorly.
How does that make you feel knowing that they've been taken or suspecting they've been taken to Gaza?
Terrible. All I can think is why the hell should I know they are being kept in Gaza via
channel Instagram. Presumably you've called your aunt's phone. Does it ring? Does anybody answer?
Actually, at the beginning, when some people try to text her, the Hamas answered the phone and wrote
in English. But other than that, when we try to call now, there is no line. You don't reach
to anything. It's ringing, but nobody answered. Have you spoken to the police? Have you spoken
to people in the army? We try. Even during the library, we call the authorities and they all say
they are aware of the problem and they really don't have something to do right now. It is a chaos.
It is really a chaos. It was a chaos. It's still a chaos. People don't know how to manage.
It was really a surprise attack. People don't know how to manage the situation.
What do you and the rest of the family want the authorities to do when it comes to your
aunt's partner and his children? We want to bring them home safe, no matter what the price is.
I think we all, the toll they took from us, we have 700 people killed,
thousands of people injured, not several injured, wounded very hard. It's not supposed to be in
civilians' people. Civilians shouldn't be paying this price.
Your family is clearly going through a very worrying, harrowing time at the moment.
What is it like being an Israeli right now? It's a bit disappointing. It's a bit hard.
It's unknown. You don't know what's going to be tomorrow. Is there a big attack also from
Hezbollah? Things are going to cool down. Somebody is going to take care of all the people who
got injured, who is not home, who is dead. There is so many questions you need to be asked and
I don't know. You feel a lot of things right now in Israel, but we all feel very divided.
That was Yadin who didn't want us to use her surname talking about her aunt and her partner
and their children, including eight-year-old Ella, who they watched being
abducted by Hamas fighters on a Facebook Live video on Saturday. We did put her point that
the authorities had done very little in her view. To the Israeli military spokesperson we had on
the program and she said that they would work to try to recover all of the people who had been taken.
That is it for this edition of Newsday. More on that continuing situation in the Middle East
on the BBC website at bbcnews.com. Thank you for listening. Thank you.
This is KJZZ FM Phoenix and HD, a service of the Maricopa Community Colleges.
You can get accurate news and informed analysis every day from KJZZ. You get diverse viewpoints
from the region and the world, and it's the news and information you rely on. We're online at
